---
layout: post
title: "My Vision for AI and the Web"
date: 2025-09-01
author: "Tarek Ziade"
tags: [AI, Web, Firefox, Privacy, Browsers]
---

The way we use the web is shifting fast. Some people are still reluctant to
embrace AI, but the reality in 2025 is that it is here to stay. The right
response is not to reject it, but to make the best of it and shape it in ways
that serve us. Search indices are fading, and chatbots are taking their place.
Instead of browsing links, we are asking questions and getting answers directly.
That is convenient, but it also moves control away from users and into the hands
of a few AI providers.  

## The Browser’s New Role

Browsers have always been the gateway to the web, but for a long time they have
stayed neutral. Now, with AI changing how we find and use information, I believe
the browser should become more active. That is why we have started adding local
AI features in Firefox that respect privacy by design. For example, the PDF.js
alt text generator and the Smart Tab feature both run on small models that we
trained, which are downloaded to your device and executed locally. Your data
never leaves your machine. This is the kind of approach that keeps people in
control, instead of handing that control over to centralized platforms.  

## The Hybrid Approach

AI will not all run locally yet. Large models still need server-side power. But
smaller, specialized models can run on your device today, privately and
securely. That is the balance I believe in: local AI for lightweight,
privacy-first features, and server AI only when the workload is too heavy. On
top of that, privacy on the server side is improving quickly thanks to
technologies like GPU enclaves, for example Nvidia's Confidential Compute. As
devices get stronger and these safeguards mature, more intelligence can shift
back to the user’s side with stronger guarantees at every step.  


## Open Questions

There is still much to figure out. One of the biggest changes is that large
language models are increasingly acting as intermediaries to the web itself.

Instead of users directly searching, visiting sites, and making their own
judgments, LLMs are fetching, ranking, and even rewriting information before
presenting it back. 

That raises difficult questions:

- How do we ensure that users remain in control when the LLM is doing the search
for them?

- Can the browser provide visibility into what the model retrieved and why, so
users are not left in the dark?

- What role should open standards play to ensure transparency and user choice when
AI providers add search capabilities directly into their platforms?

These are open design questions that don’t have easy answers. But they are
central to making sure AI serves people, rather than simply reshaping the web in
ways that strip away agency.

## The Future

The path forward is clear to me. We need to build powerful hybrid-based
features, but always with deep care for security and privacy. That is how we
make AI in the browser truly serve the people who use it.

